Teleport 5.0 Changelog (#4785)
gravitational/teleport: CHANGELOG.md

# Changelog

## 5.0.0.rc1

> This is a major Teleport release with a focus on new features, functionality, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teleport 5.0 is a major release with new features, functionality, and
```

> bug fixes. It’s a substantial release and users can review [5.0 closed issues](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/milestone/39?closed=1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bug fixes. Users can review [5.0 closed issues](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/milestone/39?closed=1)
```

on Github for details of all items.

#### New Features

> Teleport 5.0 is a major version and an introduction to Teleport's Unified Access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teleport 5.0 is a major version release and introduces two distinct features: Teleport Application Access and the Unified Access Plane with significant Kubernetes enhancements like multi-cluster support, backwards compatibility, and more.
```

> Teleport 5.0 is a major version and an introduction to Teleport's Unified Access

Reviewer: The unified access plane is mentioned only once outside of this. I know there isn't a need for substantial documentation, but we should have a short header describing what it is and maybe a link to a blog post on the topic.

> Plane. Going beyond just SSH access, with first class Kubernetes support

Reviewer 2: Missing verb in the second sentence. Users can go beyond SSH access and get improved Kubernetes support and new Application access

> Plane. Going beyond just SSH access, with first class Kubernetes support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

and the new addition of Application Support.

##### Teleport Application Access

> Teleport can be used to provide secure access to Applications. We've

Reviewer 2: web apps. This is not a marketing release, but a note for engineers, can we keep it close to devs language?

Author: Fixed

> Teleport can be used to provide secure access to Applications. We've

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teleport provides secure access to web applications.
```

built this Teleport Application Access with an eye for securing those internal apps
which might once of lived on the VPN or have a simple oauth mechanism but with little

> to no audit trail.  We've tested everything from router control panels to Single

Reviewer 2: why Single is upper case? Great sentence btw

Author: Just a typo - Fixed.

> built this Teleport Application Access with an eye for securing those internal apps
> which might once have lived on the VPN or have a simple OAuth mechanism but with little
> to no audit trail.  We've tested everything from router control panels to single
> page javascript apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new feature was built with the express intention of securing internal applications that may live on a VPN with broad access and scanty audit trails. We've tested everything from various dashboards to single
page javascript apps.
```

> Adding an Application follows the same UX as adding servers. An invite token needs
> to be created. This can be static or dynamic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding an application follows the same UX as adding SSH servers or Kubernetes clusters, starting with creating a static or dynamic invite token.
```

```bash
$ tctl tokens add --type=app
```

> A Teleport node can be used to route to Application from the unified

Reviewer 2: why Application is upper case?

access plane. The Teleport node can be deployed alongside applications, enabling teams

> to setup access on a loopback address so only Teleport Application Access can access the app.

Reviewer 2: application access (Teleport Application access has been introduced already)

Author: Fixed

> to setup access on a loopback address so only Teleport Application Access can access the app.

Reviewer: 1. If we include a section describing UAP, we can remove the reference here
2. I don't understand what the loopback address means. Does this refer to deploying application access in front of apps to enforce an access flow?

```yaml
# ...
proxy_service:
  # We've extended support for https certs. Teleport can now load multiple
  # TLS certificates. In the below example we've obtained a wildcard cert

>   # that'll be used for proxy the applications.

Reviewer 2: Tell more about how the certificate is selected (based on the hostname in the HTTPS request using SNI @russjones right?)

  https_keypairs:
  - key_file: /etc/letsencrypt/live/teleport.example.com/privkey.pem
  - cert_file: /etc/letsencrypt/live/teleport.example.com/fullchain.pem
  - key_file: /etc/letsencrypt/live/*.teleport.example.com/privkey.pem

>   - cert_file: /etc/letsencrypt/live/*.teleport.example.com/fullchain.pem

Author: TIL that `-d teleport.example.com,*.teleport.example.com` will give you one cert and a wildcard. That's super handy. I'll add that to my other Application Access PR

>   - cert_file: /etc/letsencrypt/live/*.teleport.example.com/fullchain.pem

Author: I'm going to mark this as resolved as I'm porting this over the application guide.

# ...
app_service:
   # Teleport Application Access is enabled.
   enabled: yes
   # We've a sample debugger app that'll check
   # that Teleport Application Access is working
   # and will output JWT tokens.
   # https://dumper.teleport.example.com:3080/
   debug_app: true
   apps:

>    # Teleport Application Access can be used to proxy any HTTP Endpoint

Reviewer 2: already introduced the full sentence, can use application access

>    # Note: Name can't include any spaces

Author: I've added a note about DNS compatibly

   - name: "internal-dashboard"
     uri: "http://10.0.1.27:8000"
     # By default Teleport will make this application

>      # available on sub-domain. Thus the importance of setting up

Reviewer 2: what sub-are domain, give an example

>      # wilcard DNS. If you want, it's possible to setup a vanity

Reviewer 2: what does that mean vanity url?

     # url. DNS records should point to the proxy server.
     # `internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # Example Vanity URL for the internal-dashboard app.

>      # public_addr: "dashboard.acme.com"

Reviewer 2: what do they do with vanity url

>      # By default Teleport will make this application
>      # available on sub-domain. Thus the importance of setting up
>      # wilcard DNS. If you want, it's possible to setup a vanity
>      # url. DNS records should point to the proxy server.
>      # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
>      # Example Vanity URL for the internal-dashboard app.
>      # public_addr: "dashboard.acme.com"

Reviewer: This code comment can be shortened. IMO, we don't need to explain how to configure certain behavior, just that it can be done. 

```suggestion
     # By default Teleport makes this application
     # available on a sub-domain like teleport.example.com.
     # You can point public addresses DNS records to the application access proxy server
     # and have redirect users from dashboard.example.com to internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
```

     # Optional Labels
     labels:

>        name: "jwt"

Reviewer 2: how those are used?

>      # Optional Dynamic Labels

Reviewer 2: why all upper case?

     commands:
     - name: "os"
       command: ["/usr/bin/uname"]
       period: "5s"

>     # A proxy can support multipe applications. Teleport Application Access

Reviewer 2: same, application access

>     # can also deployed as a sidecar service.

Reviewer 2: we use node instead of sidecar

    - name: "arris"
        uri: "http://localhost:3001"

>         public_addr: "arris.asteroid.earth"

Reviewer 2: let's use example.com

```

##### Teleport Kubernetes Access

> Teleport 5.0 introduces two highly requested features.  The ability to connect multiple

Reviewer 2: the second sentence is missing verb as the thrid one

Kubernetes Clusters to one Teleport Access Plane. Greatly reducing operational complexity.
We now provide near complete Kubernetes audit log capture [#4526](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4526). Going beyond our current `kubectl exec`. For a full overview please
review the [Kubernetes RFD](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0005-kubernetes-service.md)

> To support these changes we've introduced a new server. This moves Teleport Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: a new service

> support from the `proxy_service` into it's own dedicated `kubernetes_service`

Reviewer 2: mention backwards compatibility

connect hundreds of customers clusters, when combined with Access Workflows cluster
access can easily be given.

Creating a trusted cluster join token for a production environment.

```bash
$ tctl tokens add --type=trusted_cluster --labels=env=prod
```

```yaml
kind: role
#...
  deny:
    # cluster labels control what clusters user can connect to. The wildcard ('*')
    # means any cluster. By default none is set in deny rules to preserve backwards
    # compatibility
    cluster_labels:
      'env': 'prod'
```

##### Signed RPM and Releases
Starting with Teleport 5.0 we now provide an RPM Repo for Teleport.

See https://rpm.releases.teleport.dev/ for more details.

#### Improvements
* A `--format=json` playback option for `tsh`. e.g. `$ tsh play --format=json ~/play/0c0b81ed-91a9-4a2a-8d7c-7495891a6ca0.tar | jq '.event` [#4578](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/4578)
* Teleport can setup continuous backups and auto scaling for DynamoDB [#4780](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/4780)
* Linux ARM64/ARMv8 (64-bit) Release [#3383](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3383)

> * `https_keypairs:` replaces `https_key_file: & https_cert_file`. Letting customers load multiple https certs to support Teleport Application Access.

Author: I've added a note about Backwards compatibility and also an optional note in the upgrade notes.

Enterprise Only:
* `tctl` can load creds from `~/.tsh`. [#4678](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4678)
* Teams can require a reason when using Access Workflows [#4573](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4573#issuecomment-720777443)

#### Fixes

* `tctl`: always format resources as lists in JSON/YAML [#4281](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4281)
* `tsh`: print kubernetes info in profile status [#4348](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4348)
* Intermittent issues with loginuid.so in Teleport 4.2.0 [#3245](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3245)

> * Reduding log spam  `access denied to Proxy` [#2920](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/2920)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Reducing log spam  `access denied to Proxy` [#2920](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/2920)
```

> * Various AMI Fixes

Author: Yes, can you write up a short description. I've seen a few tickets but looking for a short sentence to share externally.

   # Note: Name can't include any spaces and should be DNS-compatible A-Za-z0-9-._
   - name: "internal-dashboard"
     uri: "http://10.0.1.27:8000"
     # By default Teleport will make this application
     # available on a sub-domain of your Teleport proxy's hostname
     # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # - thus the importance of setting up wilcard DNS.
     # If you want, it's possible to setup a custom public url.
     # DNS records should point to the proxy server.
     # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # Example Public URL for the internal-dashboard app.
     # public_addr: "internal-dashboard.acme.com"
     # Optional labels
     # Labels can be combined with RBAC rules to provide access.
     labels:
       customer: "acme",
       env: "production"
     # Optional dynamic labels
     commands:
     - name: "os"
       command: ["/usr/bin/uname"]
       period: "5s"
     # A proxy can support multiple applications. Application Access
     # can also be deployed with a Teleport node.
     - name: "arris"
       uri: "http://localhost:3001"
       public_addr: "arris.example.com"
```

##### Teleport Kubernetes Access

> Teleport 5.0 introduces two highly requested features.  The ability to connect multiple
> Kubernetes Clusters to one Teleport Access Plane. Greatly reducing operational complexity.
> We now provide near complete Kubernetes audit log capture [#4526](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4526). Going beyond our current `kubectl exec`. For a full overview please
> review the [Kubernetes RFD](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0005-kubernetes-service.md)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Teleport 5.0 introduces two highly requested features:
- The ability to connect multiple Kubernetes Clusters to one Teleport Access Plane, greatly reducing operational complexity.
- We now provide near complete Kubernetes audit log capture [#4526](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4526), going beyond our current `kubectl exec`.
  - For a full overview please review the [Kubernetes RFD](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0005-kubernetes-service.md)
```

> To support these changes we've introduced a new service. This moves Teleport Kubernetes
> support from the `proxy_service` into its own dedicated `kubernetes_service`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To support these changes, we've introduced a new service. This moves Teleport Kubernetes
support from the `proxy_service` into its own dedicated `kubernetes_service`.
```

> When adding the new Kubernetes service a new type of join token is required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When adding the new Kubernetes service, a new type of join token is required.

```

```bash
tctl tokens add --type=kubernetes
```

> Example configuration for the new `kubernetes_service`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Example configuration for the new `kubernetes_service`:

```

```yaml
# ...
kubernetes_service:
   enabled: yes
   public_addr: [k8s.example.com:3026]
   listen_addr: 0.0.0.0:3026
   kubeconfig_file: /secrets/kubeconfig
```

#### New "tsh kube" commands

`tsh kube` commands are used to query registered clusters and switch
`kubeconfig` context:

```sh

> $ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com --user=awly
> # list all registered clusters
> $ tsh kube clusters
> Cluster Name       Status
> -------------      ------
> a.k8s.example.com  online
> b.k8s.example.com  online
> c.k8s.example.com  online
> # on login, kubeconfig is pointed at the first cluster (alphabetically)
> $ kubectl config current-context
> awly@a.k8s.example.com
> # but all clusters are populated as contexts
> $ kubectl config get-contexts
> CURRENT   NAME                     CLUSTER             AUTHINFO
> *         awly@a.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@a.k8s.example.com
>           awly@b.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@b.k8s.example.com
>           awly@c.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@c.k8s.example.com
> # switch between different clusters:
> $ tsh kube login c.k8s.example.com
> # Or
> $ kubectl config use-context awly@c.k8s.example.com
> # check current cluster
> $ kubectl config current-context
> awly@c.k8s.example.com

Reviewer 3: This breaks the solid wall of text up to make it a bit easier to read:

```suggestion
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com --user=awly

# list all registered clusters
$ tsh kube clusters
Cluster Name       Status
-------------      ------
a.k8s.example.com  online
b.k8s.example.com  online
c.k8s.example.com  online

# on login, kubeconfig is pointed at the first cluster (alphabetically)
$ kubectl config current-context
awly@a.k8s.example.com

# but all clusters are populated as contexts
$ kubectl config get-contexts
CURRENT   NAME                     CLUSTER             AUTHINFO
*         awly@a.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@a.k8s.example.com
          awly@b.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@b.k8s.example.com
          awly@c.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@c.k8s.example.com

# switch between different clusters:
$ tsh kube login c.k8s.example.com

# the traditional way is also supported:
$ kubectl config use-context awly@c.k8s.example.com

# check current cluster
$ kubectl config current-context
awly@c.k8s.example.com
```

```

Other Kubernetes changes:

> * Support k8s clusters behind firewall/NAT using a single teleport cluster [#3667](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3667)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Support k8s clusters behind firewall/NAT using a single Teleport cluster [#3667](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3667)
```

> * Support multiple k8s clusters per a single teleport proxy instance [#3952](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3952)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Support multiple k8s clusters with a single Teleport proxy instance [#3952](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3952)
```

##### Additional User and Token Resource

> We've added two new RBAC resources, these provide the ability to limit token creation
> and to list and modify Teleport users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We've added two new RBAC resources; these provide the ability to limit token creation
and to list and modify Teleport users:
```

```yaml
- resources: [user]
  verbs: [list,create,read,update,delete]
- resources: [token]
  verbs: [list,create,read,update,delete]
```

> ##### Cluster Labels

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Cluster Labels

```

Teleport 5.0 adds the ability to set labels on Trusted Clusters. The labels
are set when creating a trusted cluster invite token. This lets teams use the same
RBAC controls to approve or deny access. This can be especially useful for MSPs that
connect hundreds of customers' clusters, when combined with Access Workflows cluster
access can easily be delegated.

Creating a trusted cluster join token for a production environment:

```bash
$ tctl tokens add --type=trusted_cluster --labels=env=prod
```

```yaml
kind: role
#...
  deny:
    # cluster labels control what clusters user can connect to. The wildcard ('*')

>     # means any cluster. By default none is set in deny rules to preserve backwards

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # means any cluster. By default, deny rules are empty to preserve backwards
```

    # compatibility
    cluster_labels:
      'env': 'prod'
```

##### Signed RPM and Releases

> Starting with Teleport 5.0 we now provide an RPM repo for Teleport.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting with Teleport 5.0, we now provide an RPM repo for stable releases of Teleport.
```

* Linux ARM64/ARMv8 (64-bit) Release [#3383](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3383)
* `https_keypairs:` replaces `https_key_file: & https_cert_file`. Letting customers load multiple https certs to support Teleport Application Access. Teleport 5.0 is backwards compatible with the old format but we recommend upgrading.

Enterprise Only:
* `tctl` can load credentials from `~/.tsh`. [#4678](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4678)
* Teams can require a reason when using Access Workflows [#4573](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4573#issuecomment-720777443)

#### Fixes

* `tctl`: always format resources as lists in JSON/YAML [#4281](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4281)
* `tsh`: print kubernetes info in profile status [#4348](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4348)
* Intermittent issues with loginuid.so in Teleport 4.2.0 [#3245](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3245)
* Reducing log spam  `access denied to Proxy` [#2920](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/2920)

> * Various AMI Fixes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Various AMI fixes (paths are now consistent with other Teleport packages, config files will not be overwritten on reboot)
```

#### Documentation
- [Updated `gRPC` API Reference](https://gravitational.com/teleport/docs/api-reference/)

#### Upgrade Notes
Please follow our [standard upgrade procedure](https://gravitational.com/teleport/docs/admin-guide/#upgrading-teleport).

> * Optional: Consider updating https_key_file & https_cert_file to our new `https_keypairs:` format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Optional: Consider updating `https_key_file` & `https_cert_file` to our new `https_keypairs:` format.
```

# Changelog

## 5.0.0.rc1

Teleport 5.0 is a major release with new features, functionality, and
bug fixes. Users can review [5.0 closed issues](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/milestone/39?closed=1)
on Github for details of all items.

#### New Features

> Teleport 5.0 is a major version release and introduces two distinct features: Teleport Application Access and the Unified Access Plane with significant Kubernetes enhancements like multi-cluster support, backwards compatibility, and more.

Reviewer 2: Teleport Application Access and significant Kubenetes Access improvements - multi-cluster support...

> and the new addition of Application Support.

Reviewer 2: remove this line

##### Teleport Application Access
Teleport provides secure access to web applications. This new feature was built with the express intention of securing those internal apps which might once lived on a VPN or had a simple oauth mechanism with little to no audit trail. We've tested everything from various dashboards to single page javascript apps.

Adding an application follows the same UX as adding SSH servers or Kubernetes clusters, starting with creating a static or dynamic invite token.

```bash
$ tctl tokens add --type=app
```

> A Teleport node can be used to route an application from the unified access plane.

Reviewer 2: Let's improve this sentence

The application access service can be deployed alongside applications, enabling teams
to setup access on a loopback address so only application access can provide ingress to
the app.

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: This goes into  a lot of detail really quick, we have a simple CLI flow, let's mention it first.

Author: Added in this sentance

> > 
> Adding an application is as simple as starting Teleport with a few new flags.
> ```sh
> $ teleport start --roles=app --token=xyz --auth-server=proxy.example.com:3080 \
>     --app-name="example-app" \
>     --app-uri="http://localhost:8080"
> ```
> This start script will create an app server that proxies the application "example-app"
> running at http://localhost:8080.
> 
> Applications can can configured using the new `app_service`.
>

   # Application Access can be used to proxy any HTTP Endpoint
   # Note: Name can't include any spaces and should be DNS-compatible A-Za-z0-9-._
   - name: "internal-dashboard"
     uri: "http://10.0.1.27:8000"
     # By default Teleport will make this application
     # available on a sub-domain of your Teleport proxy's hostname
     # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # - thus the importance of setting up wilcard DNS.
     # If you want, it's possible to setup a custom public url.
     # DNS records should point to the proxy server.
     # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # Example Public URL for the internal-dashboard app.
     # public_addr: "internal-dashboard.acme.com"
     # Optional labels
     # Labels can be combined with RBAC rules to provide access.
     labels:
       customer: "acme",
       env: "production"
     # Optional dynamic labels
     commands:
     - name: "os"
       command: ["/usr/bin/uname"]
       period: "5s"
     # A proxy can support multiple applications. Application Access
     # can also be deployed with a Teleport node.
     - name: "arris"
       uri: "http://localhost:3001"
       public_addr: "arris.example.com"
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you add a link to real docs for further read.

- The ability to connect multiple Kubernetes Clusters to one Teleport Access Plane, greatly reducing operational complexity.
- We now provide near complete Kubernetes audit log capture [#4526](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4526), going beyond our current `kubectl exec`.
  - For a full overview please review the [Kubernetes RFD](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0005-kubernetes-service.md)

To support these changes, we've introduced a new service. This moves Teleport Kubernetes
support from the `proxy_service` into its own dedicated `kubernetes_service`.

When adding the new Kubernetes service, a new type of join token is required.

```bash
tctl tokens add --type=kubernetes
```

Example configuration for the new `kubernetes_service`:

```yaml
# ...
kubernetes_service:
   enabled: yes
   public_addr: [k8s.example.com:3026]
   listen_addr: 0.0.0.0:3026
   kubeconfig_file: /secrets/kubeconfig
```

#### New "tsh kube" commands

`tsh kube` commands are used to query registered clusters and switch
`kubeconfig` context:

```sh
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com --user=awly

# list all registered clusters

> $ tsh kube clusters

Reviewer 2: @russjones @awly just caught this. Please add alias `tsh kube ls` to be consistent with `tsh db ls` and `tsh ls`

Author: I've moved this comment to an issue for better tracking https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/4842

$ kubectl config get-contexts
CURRENT   NAME                     CLUSTER             AUTHINFO
*         awly@a.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@a.k8s.example.com
          awly@b.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@b.k8s.example.com
          awly@c.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@c.k8s.example.com

# switch between different clusters:
$ tsh kube login c.k8s.example.com

# the traditional way is also supported:
$ kubectl config use-context awly@c.k8s.example.com

# check current cluster
$ kubectl config current-context
awly@c.k8s.example.com
```

Other Kubernetes changes:

* Support k8s clusters behind firewall/NAT using a single Teleport cluster [#3667](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3667)
* Support multiple k8s clusters with a single Teleport proxy instance [#3952](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3952)

##### Additional User and Token Resource
We've added two new RBAC resources; these provide the ability to limit token creation
and to list and modify Teleport users:

```yaml
- resources: [user]
  verbs: [list,create,read,update,delete]
- resources: [token]
  verbs: [list,create,read,update,delete]
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Same, please add link to docs in the end

##### Cluster Labels

Teleport 5.0 adds the ability to set labels on Trusted Clusters. The labels
are set when creating a trusted cluster invite token. This lets teams use the same
RBAC controls to approve or deny access. This can be especially useful for MSPs that
connect hundreds of customers' clusters, when combined with Access Workflows cluster
access can easily be delegated.

Creating a trusted cluster join token for a production environment:

```bash
$ tctl tokens add --type=trusted_cluster --labels=env=prod
```

```yaml
kind: role
#...
  deny:
    # cluster labels control what clusters user can connect to. The wildcard ('*')
    # means any cluster. By default, deny rules are empty to preserve backwards
    # compatibility
    cluster_labels:
      'env': 'prod'

> ```

Reviewer 2: Same, please add link to the docs

# Changelog

## 5.0.0.rc1

Teleport 5.0 is a major release with new features, functionality, and
bug fixes. Users can review [5.0 closed issues](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/milestone/39?closed=1)
on Github for details of all items.

#### New Features
Teleport 5.0 is a major version release and introduces two distinct features: Teleport Application Access and significant Kubernetes Access improvements - multi-cluster support.

##### Teleport Application Access

> Teleport provides secure access to web applications. This new feature was built with the express intention of securing those internal apps which might once lived on a VPN or had a simple oauth mechanism with little to no audit trail. We've tested everything from various dashboards to single page javascript apps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Teleport provides secure access to web applications. This new feature was built with the express intention of securing those internal apps which might have once lived on a VPN or had a simple OAuth mechanism with little to no audit trail. We've tested everything from various dashboards to single page Javascript apps.
```

Adding an application follows the same UX as adding SSH servers or Kubernetes clusters, starting with creating a static or dynamic invite token.

```bash
$ tctl tokens add --type=app
```

A Teleport node can be used to route an application from the unified access plane.
The application access service can be deployed alongside applications, enabling teams

> to setup access on a loopback address so only application access can provide ingress to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to set up access on a loopback address so only application access can provide ingress to
```

the app.

Adding an application is as simple as starting Teleport with a few new flags.

> ```sh

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```sh
```

$ teleport start --roles=app --token=xyz --auth-server=proxy.example.com:3080 \
    --app-name="example-app" \
    --app-uri="http://localhost:8080"
```

> This start script will create an app server that proxies the application "example-app"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

This start script will create an app server that proxies the application "example-app"
```

running at http://localhost:8080.

Applications can can configured using the new `app_service`.

```yaml
# ...
proxy_service:
  # We've extended support for https certs. Teleport can now load multiple
  # TLS certificates. In the below example we've obtained a wildcard cert
  # that'll be used for proxying the applications.
  # The correct certificate is selected based on the hostname in the HTTPS
  # request using SNI.
  https_keypairs:
  - key_file: /etc/letsencrypt/live/teleport.example.com/privkey.pem
  - cert_file: /etc/letsencrypt/live/teleport.example.com/fullchain.pem
  - key_file: /etc/letsencrypt/live/*.teleport.example.com/privkey.pem
  - cert_file: /etc/letsencrypt/live/*.teleport.example.com/fullchain.pem
# ...
app_service:
   # Teleport Application Access is enabled.
   enabled: yes

>    # We've a sample debugger app that'll check

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   # We've added a default sample app that will check
```

   # that Teleport Application Access is working

>    # and will output JWT tokens.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   # and output JWT tokens.
```

   # https://dumper.teleport.example.com:3080/
   debug_app: true
   apps:

>    # Application Access can be used to proxy any HTTP Endpoint

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   # Application Access can be used to proxy any HTTP endpoint.
```

   # Note: Name can't include any spaces and should be DNS-compatible A-Za-z0-9-._
   - name: "internal-dashboard"
     uri: "http://10.0.1.27:8000"
     # By default Teleport will make this application
     # available on a sub-domain of your Teleport proxy's hostname
     # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # - thus the importance of setting up wilcard DNS.

>      # If you want, it's possible to setup a custom public url.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     # If you want, it's possible to set up a custom public url.
```

$ kubectl config get-contexts
CURRENT   NAME                     CLUSTER             AUTHINFO
*         awly@a.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@a.k8s.example.com
          awly@b.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@b.k8s.example.com
          awly@c.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@c.k8s.example.com

# switch between different clusters:
$ tsh kube login c.k8s.example.com

# the traditional way is also supported:
$ kubectl config use-context awly@c.k8s.example.com

# check current cluster
$ kubectl config current-context
awly@c.k8s.example.com
```

Other Kubernetes changes:

* Support k8s clusters behind firewall/NAT using a single Teleport cluster [#3667](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3667)
* Support multiple k8s clusters with a single Teleport proxy instance [#3952](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3952)

##### Additional User and Token Resource
We've added two new RBAC resources; these provide the ability to limit token creation
and to list and modify Teleport users:

```yaml
- resources: [user]
  verbs: [list,create,read,update,delete]
- resources: [token]
  verbs: [list,create,read,update,delete]
```

> Learn more about [Teleports RBAC Resources](https://gravitational.com/teleport/docs/enterprise/ssh-rbac/)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Learn more about [Teleport's RBAC Resources](https://gravitational.com/teleport/docs/enterprise/ssh-rbac/)
```

##### Cluster Labels

Teleport 5.0 adds the ability to set labels on Trusted Clusters. The labels
are set when creating a trusted cluster invite token. This lets teams use the same
RBAC controls to approve or deny access. This can be especially useful for MSPs that

> connect hundreds of customers' clusters, when combined with Access Workflows cluster

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
connect hundreds of customers' clusters - when combined with Access Workflows, cluster
```

access can easily be delegated.

Creating a trusted cluster join token for a production environment:

```bash
$ tctl tokens add --type=trusted_cluster --labels=env=prod
```

```yaml
kind: role
#...
  deny:
    # cluster labels control what clusters user can connect to. The wildcard ('*')
    # means any cluster. By default, deny rules are empty to preserve backwards
    # compatibility
    cluster_labels:
      'env': 'prod'
```

TODO-Create content and deeplink for cluster labels.

##### Teleport UI Updates

Teleport 5.0 iterates on the UI Refresh from 4.3. We've moved the cluster list into our

> sidebar and have added an Application launcher. For customer moving from 4.3 to 5.0, you'll notice that we moved session recordings back to their own dedicated section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
sidebar and have added an Application launcher. For customers moving from 4.3 to 5.0, you'll notice that we moved session recordings back to their own dedicated section.
```

Other updates:

>  * We now provide local user management via `https://[cluster-url]/web/users. Providing the easy ability to edit, reset and delete local users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 * We now provide local user management via `https://[cluster-url]/web/users`, providing the ability to easily edit, reset and delete local users.
```

>  * Teleport Node & App Install scripts. Currently an enterprise only feature, but customers can get easy access to 'auto-magic' installer scripts. Enterprise customers can enable this feature by modifying the 'token' resource. See note above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 * Teleport Node & App Install scripts. This is currently an Enterprise-only feature, but customers can get easy access to 'auto-magic' installer scripts. Enterprise customers can enable this feature by modifying the 'token' resource. See note above.
```

 * We've added a Waiting Room for customers using Access Workflows. [TODO-Learn more]

##### Signed RPM and Releases

> Starting with Teleport 5.0, we now provide an RPM repo for stable releases of Teleport.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting with Teleport 5.0, we now provide an RPM repo for stable releases of Teleport. We've also started signing our RPMs to provide assurance that you're always using an official build of Teleport.
```

See https://rpm.releases.teleport.dev/ for more details.

#### Improvements
* A `--format=json` playback option for `tsh`. e.g. `$ tsh play --format=json ~/play/0c0b81ed-91a9-4a2a-8d7c-7495891a6ca0.tar | jq '.event` [#4578](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/4578)

> * Teleport can setup continuous backups and auto scaling for DynamoDB [#4780](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/4780)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Teleport can set up continuous backups and auto scaling for DynamoDB [#4780](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/4780)
```

* Linux ARM64/ARMv8 (64-bit) Release [#3383](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3383)

> * `https_keypairs:` replaces `https_key_file: & https_cert_file`. Letting customers load multiple https certs to support Teleport Application Access. Teleport 5.0 is backwards compatible with the old format but we recommend upgrading.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `https_keypairs` replaces `https_key_file` and `https_cert_file`, letting customers load multiple HTTPS certs to support Teleport Application Access. Teleport 5.0 is backwards compatible with the old format, but we recommend updating your config.
```

# Changelog

## 5.0.0.rc1

Teleport 5.0 is a major release with new features, functionality, and
bug fixes. Users can review [5.0 closed issues](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/milestone/39?closed=1)
on Github for details of all items.

#### New Features
Teleport 5.0 is a major version release and introduces two distinct features: Teleport Application Access and significant Kubernetes Access improvements - multi-cluster support.

##### Teleport Application Access
Teleport provides secure access to web applications. This new feature was built with the express intention of securing those internal apps which might once lived on a VPN or had a simple oauth mechanism with little to no audit trail. We've tested everything from various dashboards to single page javascript apps.

Adding an application follows the same UX as adding SSH servers or Kubernetes clusters, starting with creating a static or dynamic invite token.

```bash
$ tctl tokens add --type=app
```

> A Teleport node can be used to route an application from the unified access plane.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Teleport node can now be used to route connections to an application from the unified access plane.
```

   # Note: Name can't include any spaces and should be DNS-compatible A-Za-z0-9-._
   - name: "internal-dashboard"
     uri: "http://10.0.1.27:8000"
     # By default Teleport will make this application
     # available on a sub-domain of your Teleport proxy's hostname
     # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # - thus the importance of setting up wilcard DNS.
     # If you want, it's possible to set up a custom public url.
     # DNS records should point to the proxy server.
     # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # Example Public URL for the internal-dashboard app.
     # public_addr: "internal-dashboard.acme.com"
     # Optional labels
     # Labels can be combined with RBAC rules to provide access.
     labels:
       customer: "acme",
       env: "production"
     # Optional dynamic labels
     commands:
     - name: "os"
       command: ["/usr/bin/uname"]
       period: "5s"
     # A proxy can support multiple applications. Application Access
     # can also be deployed with a Teleport node.
     - name: "arris"
       uri: "http://localhost:3001"
       public_addr: "arris.example.com"
```

> You can learn more at [https://gravitational.com/teleport/docs/application-access/](https://gravitational.com/teleport/docs/application-access/)

Reviewer 4: Update all links to `goteleport.com`

Author: good catch!

##### Teleport Kubernetes Access

Teleport 5.0 introduces two highly requested features:
- The ability to connect multiple Kubernetes Clusters to one Teleport Access Plane, greatly reducing operational complexity.

> - We now provide near complete Kubernetes audit log capture [#4526](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4526), going beyond our current `kubectl exec`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Complete Kubernetes audit log capture [#4526](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4526), going beyond our current `kubectl exec`.
```

>   - For a full overview please review the [Kubernetes RFD](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0005-kubernetes-service.md)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

For a full overview please review the [Kubernetes RFD](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0005-kubernetes-service.md)
```

To support these changes, we've introduced a new service. This moves Teleport Kubernetes
support from the `proxy_service` into its own dedicated `kubernetes_service`.

When adding the new Kubernetes service, a new type of join token is required.

```bash

> tctl tokens add --type=kubernetes

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
tctl tokens add --type=kube
```

```

Example configuration for the new `kubernetes_service`:

```yaml
# ...
kubernetes_service:
   enabled: yes

>    public_addr: [k8s.example.com:3026]
>    listen_addr: 0.0.0.0:3026

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   listen_addr: 0.0.0.0:3027
```

   kubeconfig_file: /secrets/kubeconfig
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Note: a Kubernetes port still needs to be configured in the `proxy_service` via `kube_listen_addr`.

```

#### New "tsh kube" commands

`tsh kube` commands are used to query registered clusters and switch
`kubeconfig` context:

```sh
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com --user=awly

# list all registered clusters

> $ tsh kube clusters

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ tsh kube ls
```

Cluster Name       Status
-------------      ------
a.k8s.example.com  online
b.k8s.example.com  online
c.k8s.example.com  online

# on login, kubeconfig is pointed at the first cluster (alphabetically)
$ kubectl config current-context

> awly@a.k8s.example.com

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
proxy.example.com-a.k8s.example.com
```

# but all clusters are populated as contexts
$ kubectl config get-contexts
CURRENT   NAME                     CLUSTER             AUTHINFO

> *         awly@a.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@a.k8s.example.com
>           awly@b.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@b.k8s.example.com
>           awly@c.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   awly@c.k8s.example.com

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*         proxy.example.com-a.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   proxy.example.com-a.k8s.example.com
          proxy.example.com-b.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   proxy.example.com-b.k8s.example.com
          proxy.example.com-c.k8s.example.com   proxy.example.com   proxy.example.com-c.k8s.example.com
```

# switch between different clusters:
$ tsh kube login c.k8s.example.com

# the traditional way is also supported:

> $ kubectl config use-context awly@c.k8s.example.com

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ kubectl config use-context proxy.example.com-c.k8s.example.com
```

# check current cluster
$ kubectl config current-context

> awly@c.k8s.example.com

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
proxy.example.com-c.k8s.example.com
```

* `https_keypairs` replaces `https_key_file` and `https_cert_file`, letting customers load multiple HTTPS certs to support Teleport Application Access. Teleport 5.0 is backwards compatible with the old format, but we recommend updating your config.

Enterprise Only:
* `tctl` can load credentials from `~/.tsh` [#4678](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4678)
* Teams can require a user submitted reason when using Access Workflows [#4573](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4573#issuecomment-720777443)

#### Fixes

* `tctl`: always format resources as lists in JSON/YAML [#4281](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4281)
* `tsh`: print kubernetes info in profile status [#4348](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/4348)
* Intermittent issues with loginuid.so in Teleport 4.2.0 [#3245](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/3245)
* Reducing log spam  `access denied to Proxy` [#2920](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/2920)
* Various AMI fixes (paths are now consistent with other Teleport packages, config files will not be overwritten on reboot)

#### Documentation

> - [Updated `gRPC` API Reference](https://gravitational.com/teleport/docs/api-reference/)

Reviewer 5: remove grpc

#### Upgrade Notes
Please follow our [standard upgrade procedure](https://gravitational.com/teleport/docs/admin-guide/#upgrading-teleport).

> * Optional: Consider updating `https_key_file` & `https_cert_file` to our new `https_keypairs:` format.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Optional: Consider updating `https_key_file` & `https_cert_file` to our new `https_keypairs:` format.
* Optional: Consider migrating Kubernetes Access from `proxy_service` to `kubernetes_service` after the upgrade.
```

running at http://localhost:8080.

Applications can can configured using the new `app_service`.

```yaml
app_service:
   # Teleport Application Access is enabled.
   enabled: yes
   # We've added a default sample app that will check
   # that Teleport Application Access is working
   # and output JWT tokens.
   # https://dumper.teleport.example.com:3080/
   debug_app: true
   apps:
   # Application Access can be used to proxy any HTTP endpoint.
   # Note: Name can't include any spaces and should be DNS-compatible A-Za-z0-9-._
   - name: "internal-dashboard"
     uri: "http://10.0.1.27:8000"
     # By default Teleport will make this application
     # available on a sub-domain of your Teleport proxy's hostname
     # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # - thus the importance of setting up wilcard DNS.
     # If you want, it's possible to set up a custom public url.
     # DNS records should point to the proxy server.
     # internal-dashboard.teleport.example.com
     # Example Public URL for the internal-dashboard app.
     # public_addr: "internal-dashboard.acme.com"
     # Optional labels
     # Labels can be combined with RBAC rules to provide access.
     labels:

>        customer: "acme",

Reviewer 3: No commas in YAML.

```suggestion
       customer: "acme"
```
